Hypervisor doc (#56)
Elektrobit/ebcl_build_tools: docs/hypervisor_config.md

# Hypervisor Config Generator
The hypervisor config generator can create configuration files for the Elektrobit Hypervisor from a declarative configuration in yaml configuration files.

## Background

> Thy Elektrobit hypervisor traditionally is configured using the lua interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Elektrobit hypervisor traditionally is configured using a lua interface.
```

Configuration of the hypervisor usually consists of:

 * Virtual Machines (e.g. linux) to be started with assigned resources like
   * CPUs
   * RAM
   * Passthrough hardware devices
   * ...
 * Applications running directly on the hypervisor
 * Available physical hardware
 * Virtual hardware like network interface pairs

The configuration using lua is very flexible, but being a full-fledged imperative programming language it is not as straight forward as it could be.

> For that reason this tool was created that can turn a declarative definition of the system configuration into the required lua code.

Reviewer: Does sound good, but currently I don't have a better proposal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For that reason, the *hypervisor config tool* was created.
It allows generation of the required lua code from a declarative system definition.
```

> Note: In the future the safety relevant applications of the hypervisor will require configuration in a format different from lua (e.g. compiled binary or binary configuration files). These files have to be created/generated as well which will likely be a part of this tool in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: In the future the safety relevant applications of the hypervisor will require configuration in a format different from lua (e.g. compiled binary or binary configuration files).
These files have to be created/generated as well which will likely be a part of this tool in the future.
```

## Overview
![Elektrobit](assets/hv_overview.png)

The image above shows the main components of the hypervisor config generator and the surrounding elements.
It shows the tooling itself (*hypervisor config tool*), which is the python code and some data (*builtin model*, *schema* and *template*) that is described later.

> There is also the *declarative configuration* that is supplied by the user (i.e. it is part of the image description) and the resulting *lua configuration* that is generated by the tool and should be built into the hypervisor image by the surrounding toolchain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is also the user-supplied  *declarative configuration* (i.e. it is part of the image description) and the resulting *lua configuration*, generated by the *hypervisor config tool* and intended to be integrated to the hypervisor image by the surrounding toolchain.
```

Author: Id rather go with something like this. Without something like "that is" it is hard to understand
```suggestion
There is also the user-supplied  *declarative configuration* (i.e. it is part of the image description) and the resulting generated *lua configuration*, that is intended to be integrated into the hypervisor image by the surrounding toolchain.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is also the user-supplied *declarative configuration* (i.e. it is part of the image description) and the resulting generated *lua configuration*, intended to be integrated into the hypervisor image by the surrounding toolchain.
```

> The last part shown here is the optional *hypervisor specialization*. It can be used to extend or change the model used for the configuration and also replace or extend the configuration files generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last part shown here is the optional *hypervisor specialization*.
It can be used to extend or change the model used for the configuration and also replace or extend the configuration files generated.
```

### Model and Schema

> As described in the overview chapter the tool comes with a model and schema definition, that can be extended using a hypervisor specialization. The main reason for that mechanism is that the hypervisor can provide different features depending on the build (i.e. a hypervisor with and without safety extensions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As described in the overview chapter the tool comes with a model and schema definition, that can be extended using a hypervisor specialization.
The main reason for that mechanism is that the hypervisor can provide different features depending on the build (i.e. a hypervisor with and without safety extensions).
```

> These features must be configurable and at the time of writing this tool and documentation it does not seem to be viable to integrate all possible features into the tool itself, so it is "outsourced" to a package created together with the hypervisor binaries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These features must be configurable for each supported platfrom. 
At the time of writing this tool and documentation it does not seem to be viable to integrate all possible features into the tool itself.
As a result, the required features are "outsourced" to an additional package, created together with the hypervisor binaries for the corresponding platform.
```

In this context the *schema* is a yaml file that describes all possible properties in the configuration file with their datatypes. It can be compared to [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/) but is very specific to the hypervisor and limited to 
required features. Everything in the configuration file is either a simple datatype (like string, integer or boolean) an object of a specific type (i.e. a named collection of specified properties) or a list of these.

> This schema is then used to parse the configuration file into a python object *model*. The model can also be extended/overwritten by the hypervisor specialization. For every named object type defined in the schema a python class exists or is dynamically created. This allows to add some functionality to transform the configuration or derive information using python code.

Reviewer: In general I would recommend to use one line per sentence, as it provides much nicer diffs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this context the *schema* is a yaml file that describes all possible properties in the configuration file with their datatypes.
It can be compared to [JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/).
Nevertheless, it is very specific to the hypervisor and limited to required features only.
Everything in the configuration file is either a simple datatype (like string, integer or boolean) an object of a specific type (i.e. a named collection of specified properties) or a list of these.
This schema is then used to parse the configuration file into a python object *model*.
The model can also be extended/overwritten by the hypervisor specialization.
For every named object type defined in the schema a python class exists or is dynamically created.
This allows to add functionality to transform the configuration or derive information using python code.
```

> The schema also defines the templates that are rendered into the final lua configuration using the python model in the last step of the tool. The templates can either be jinja2 templates (ending in .j2) then they are processed or they are just copied (e.g. for lua library code).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The schema also defines templates that are rendered into the final lua configuration using the python model in the last step of the tool.
The templates can either be jinja2 templates (ending in .j2), being processed by the tool, or lua code that can be copied directly.
```

## Usage
The tool always requires the configuration yaml file and the output directory:
```bash
hypervisor_config config.yaml output_dir
```

> When a hypervisor specialization is to be used there are two variants:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two variants available to hand over a hypervisor specialization:
```

 * *dtb*: A string specifying the name of the binary device tree. (Automatically added to modules.list)
 * *vbus*: An optional string specifying a virtual bus. (See [vbus](#vbus---list-of-virtual-busses))
 * *shms*: A list of strings of names of shared memory segments that are available to the VM. (See [shms](#shms---list-of-shared-memory-segments))
 * *virtio_block*: A list of virtio block devices used to serve a block device from one VM as as virtio block device in another VM. (see [Virtio Block Devices](#virtio-block-devices))
 * *vnets*: A list of strings that create virtual network pair devices. The same name must be used in exactly two virtual machines to create a pair of connected virtio net interfaces in the two VMs.

#### *shms* - List of shared memory segments
Shared memory segments can be used to assign the same physical RAM to more than one virtual machine (or even L4RE applications).
The *shms* property defines a list of shared memory segments with the following properties for each shm segment:

 * *name*: The name of the segment used to reference it in a virtual machine configuration and its device tree.
 * *size*: The size of the segment in bytes.

>  * *address*: The optional physical address of the shared memory. If this is not set a valid address is automatically determined. If set it will trigger an error if the address is already used or outside of the RAM. Use with caution!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * *address*: The optional physical address of the shared memory. If this is not set, a valid address is determined automatically. If the set address is already in use or outside of the RAM, it will trigger an error. Use with caution!
```

    compatible = "virtio,mmio";
    reg = <0x1000 0x200>;
    interrupt-parent = <&gic>;
    interrupts = <0 0x7d 4>;
    l4vmm,vdev = "proxy";
    l4vmm,virtiocap = "data_server"; /* name with _server appended */
    status = "okay";
  };
```
The devices will be visible as `/dev/hvcX`. (See [cons](#cons---configuration-of-the-console-multiplexer) for some information on the ordering).

In `vm2`- on the client side - the device tree needs nodes like this:
```c
virtio_block@0 {
  compatible = "virtio,mmio";
  reg = <0x0 0x1000>; /* The address can be set arbitrarily, but should not collide and be page aligned */
  interrupt-parent = <&gic>;
  interrupts = <0 0x60 4>; /* irq numbers can be selected freely as long as they don't collide */
  l4vmm,vdev = "proxy";
  l4vmm,virtiocap = "root_client"; /* name with _client appended */
  status = "okay";
};

virtio_block@1000 {
  compatible = "virtio,mmio";
  reg = <0x1000 0x1000>;
  interrupt-parent = <&gic>;
  interrupts = <0 0x61 4>;
  l4vmm,vdev = "proxy";
  l4vmm,virtiocap = "data_client"; /* name with _client appended */
  status = "okay";
};
```
This will create two `/dev/vdY`devices with `Y` being a letter starting at 'a'.

> If these are the only two `virtio,mmio` devices in the device tree that are backed by a block device, the names will be `vda` for `root` and `vdb` for `data`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If these are the only two `virtio,mmio` devices in the device tree backed by a block device, the names will be `vda` for `root` and `vdb` for `data`.
```

    optional_str:
      type:     string
      optional: true
      default:  default_value
    # A list of boolean that will have the default value [true, false, false] when not specified
    list_of_bool:
      type:      boolean
      aggregate: list
      optional:  true
      default:
       - true
       - false
       - false
    # An enum with valid values: value_a or value_b
    an_enum:
      type:      enum
      enum_values:
       - value_a
       - value_b
    # An optional list of objects from type AnotherObject. Will be None if not specified
    list_of_objects:
      type:      AnotherObject
      aggregate: list
      optional:  true

  # Define a class called AnotherObject ...
  AnotherObject:
    # ... with just one property name as string
    name:
      type:      string

# The root class is the root node
root: Root

# Define templates to be rendered
template:
  - jinja_template.cfg.j2
  - copy_me.lua
```

The schema above can parse this configuration file:
```yaml
simple_int: 42
optional_str: some string
list_of_bool:
  - false
  - false
  - true
an_enum: value_b
list_of_objects:
  - name: object 1
  - name: object 2
```

> Parsing this will return an instance of a `Root`-object with the five properties set and the `list_of_objects` property will contain a list of two `AnotherObject` instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parsing this will return an instance of a `Root`-object with the five properties set.
The `list_of_objects` property will contain a list of two `AnotherObject` instances.
```

This root object is passed to the jinja templates using the variable name `config` and can then be used to render the templates.

> Two templates are rendered in this example: *jinja_template.cfg.j2* is rendered using jinja2 and will be stored in the output folder as *jinja_template.cfg*. While *copy_me.lua* is just copied to the output folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Two templates are rendered in this example: 
*jinja_template.cfg.j2* is rendered using jinja2 and will be stored in the output folder as *jinja_template.cfg*. 
*copy_me.lua* is just copied to the output folder.
```

### Model

> In this context model means the python object model representing the configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this context, model means the python object model representing the configuration.
```
